USHIFT-5473: Doc for AI Model Serving (#4673)
openshift/microshift: docs/user/ai_model_serving.md

## Appendix
### Overriding kserve configuration

If you wish to override kserve settings, you need to make a copy of existing ConfigMap, tweak the desired settings, and overwrite the existing ConfigMap.

Settings are stored in a ConfigMap named `inferenceservice-config` in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace.
Alternatively, you can copy the ConfigMap from `/usr/lib/microshift/manifests.d/001-microshift-ai-model-serving/kserve/inferenceservice-config-microshift-patch.yaml`.

After tweaking it, you must apply the ConfigMap and restart kserve (e.g. by deleting Pod or scaling the Deployment down to 0 and back to 1).
For RHEL For Edge and RHEL Image Mode systems, create a new manifest making sure it's applied after `/usr/lib/microshift/manifests.d/001-microshift-ai-model-serving`.

### Limitations
- AI Model Serving on MicroShift is only available on the x86_64 platform.
- AI Model Serving on MicroShift supports a very specific subset of the RHOAI Operator components.
- You must secure the exposed model server's endpoint (e.g. OAUTH2).
- Not all model servers support IPv6.
- Only OCI (ModelCar) model delivery system is tested and supported

> ### Known issues

Reviewer: @pmtk should we add here OVMS is not supported on IPv6? https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHOAIENG-21756

Reviewer: I agree, I missed that comment. Thanks.

# AI Model Serving on MicroShift

AI Model Serving on MicroShift is a platform for serving AI models.

> It includes limited subset of Red Hat OpenShift AI (RHOAI): [kserve](https://github.com/opendatahub-io/kserve) and ServingRuntimes.

Author: Kserve has several modes of operation: serverless, model mesh, and raw deployment.

For microshift we opted for Raw Deployment mode because we don't need to install extra dependencies (istio and knative).

There's nothing preventing users from changing the kserve's settings and installing istio+knative, but from MicroShift's perspective I believe we only want to support RawDeployment? @DanielFroehlich wdyt?

Now you can train your models in the cloud and serve them on the edge.

MicroShift is intended for the edge (small footprint, low resources),
therefore kserve is configured to use a "Raw Deployment" mode which means that:
- Kubernetes Deployments and Services will be created, and

> - neither Service Mesh (Istio) nor Serverless (Knative) are required.

Reviewer 2: If this is a user doc, I'm not sure how to interpret this info, mostly the first bullet.

Author: Yeah. I wrote this doc from a perspective of someone already knowing kserve so wanted to write out the differences, but maybe we need to show in simpler way how we intend it to be used on microshift

Additionally, automatic creation of the Ingress objects is disabled. If you want to expose your model outside the cluster,

> create a Route object instead.

Reviewer 2: This should probably go with the above info in a more user-friendly way.

[Learn more about Raw deployment mode from RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#raw_deployment_mode)

## Limitations
- Currently, AI Model Serving on MicroShift is only available on x86_64 platform.
- AI Model Serving on MicroShift only includes very specific subset of RHOAI.

> - Securing (e.g. OAUTH2) exposed model server's endpoint is user's responsibility

Reviewer 2: Did we not discover that not all the models / servers work on IPv6?

## Known issues
- Because of [bug in kserve](https://github.com/kserve/kserve/pull/4274)
  ([to be ported to RHOAI](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHOAIENG-21106)),

>   rebooting a MicroShift host can result model server not coming back up if it was using ModelCar (model in OCI image).

Reviewer 2: Let's rephrase it in more user-friendly way, please.

- Because of MicroShift's architecture, installing microshift-ai-model-serving RPM before running `systemctl start microshift` for the first time,

>   can cause a failure to start up, however MicroShift will restart and then start successfully. See [OCPBUGS-51365](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBUGS-51365).

Author: Yes, it is

>   - **It might also cause the ServingRuntimes to not be deployed because kustomizer gives up before webhook is available**

Author: This is a bit more nuanced and I think I'll remove it from the doc as I plan to work on this next week.
MicroShift will fail to apply ServingRuntimes only if the kserve Pod isn't running yet.
So e.g. first start after install, first start after reboot (if it didn't happen the previous boot). But if MicroShift runs for 10 minutes, kserve is up, and someone runs `systemctl restart microshift`, then it would work because the webhook is up.
Just FYI, I don't think we need to document it.

- Currently, ClusterServingRuntimes are not supported by RHOAI which means that
  user needs to copy ServingRuntime shipped within the package to their workload's namespace.
  In future releases we're hoping to transition to ClusterServingRuntime which is ServingRuntime usable from any namespace

>   (if users will need to override some options, they still will be able to create ServingRuntime which take precedence over ClusterServingRuntime).

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure making future looking statements is necessary here.

## Definitions

- [ServingRuntime](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#servingruntime)
- [InferenceService](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#inferenceservice)

## Supported ServingRuntimes

For the list of supported Serving Runtimes refer to

> [RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#supported-model-serving-runtimes_serving-large-models).

Author: I believe so. I haven't tested all of them, but none of these are for 'multi model' deployments, so they should work with any kserve.

> [RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#supported-model-serving-runtimes_serving-large-models).

Author: On second thought: I guess we want to say we support only those runtimes we tested with microshift, right? So at the time it means OpenVino Model Server and vLLM (for nvidia, not guadi or amd)

> [RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#supported-model-serving-runtimes_serving-large-models).

Reviewer: Totally agree on this. It may be other relevant limitations, for example currently under investigation: OpenVino Model is supported on IPv6?

> [RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#supported-model-serving-runtimes_serving-large-models).

Reviewer 3: @agullon Will we test all of these in the future? Wondering if we consider additional model use Tech Preview. @DanielFroehlich WDYT?

> Keep in mind that in MicroShift they are created directly as ServingRuntimes in `redhat-ods-applications`, not as templates,

Author: Not really. It's more of a implementation detail and diff to RHOAI.
Just copying the SR to custom namespace looks different compared to RHOAI.

> Keep in mind that in MicroShift they are created directly as ServingRuntimes in `redhat-ods-applications`, not as templates,

Author: Depends whether you're applying it against cluster directly or creating a manifest

so they need to be copied to workload's namespace.

## General usage overview

> 

Author: Yes, but the markdown rendering fixes it for "Rich view/diff"

1. Prepare model for serving

> 1. Configure OS and MicroShift for the hardware - driver & device plugin

Author: @hgeaydem, @DanielFroehlich, @ggiguash do you know anything about "image mode" and accelerator drivers? Is there any procedure? Especially matching driver against bootc image kernel (as during build time I think it'll use host's kernel).
I don't know anything about bootc and RT kernel either tbh...

> 1. Install AI Model Serving for MicroShift

Reviewer: Should we mention here to install both RPMs?
 - `microshift-ai-model-serving`
 - `microshift-ai-model-serving-release-info`

> 1. (Optional) Package model into an OCI image (ModelCar)

Author: TBH best info is the upstream kserve doc: https://kserve.github.io/website/latest/modelserving/storage/oci/
There are other ways of delivering the model (S3, URI, PVC) but so far I only tested ModelCar (OCI).
In general ModelCar is very convenient for offline deployments: you can embed the OCI image just like any other container image.

> 1. Select suitable Serving Runtime (Model Server)

Author: Yeah, but RHOAI doc has more info about them, like formats, etc.

> 1. Copy ServingRuntime Custom Resource from `redhat-ods-applications` to your own namespace

Author: What do you mean by "application namespace"?
You create ServingRuntime and InferenceService in namespace X, and in the same namespace the model server serving the model will run.

1. Create InferenceService

> 1. Create Route

Author: Yes. If the workload that will ask model server about stuff is inside the microshift cluster, it does not require the route

> 1. Make requests against model server

Author: This is just very general overview, more information below

## Setting up hardware - drivers and device plugins

In order to enable GPU/hardware accelerator for Red Hat Device Edge,
you must follow partner's guidance on installing Operator, or driver for RHEL and Device Plugin for Kubernetes.
Operators may be more convenient, but installing only the driver and device plugin may be more resource efficient.

MicroShift does not provide support for partner's procedure.
In case of any problems consult partner's documentation or support.

> Following links serve only as examples / pointers and may not include everything needed.

Author: Yes

  - [Device Plugin](https://github.com/NVIDIA/k8s-device-plugin)
  - [Container Toolkit](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/cloud-native/container-toolkit/latest/install-guide.html)
  - [Driver](https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/tesla/driver-installation-guide/index.html) / [CUDA Toolkit](https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-installation-guide-linux/)
- Intel Guadi
  - [Base Operator](https://docs.habana.ai/en/latest/Installation_Guide/Additional_Installation/Kubernetes_Installation/Kubernetes_Operator.html)
  - [Device Plugin](https://docs.habana.ai/en/latest/Installation_Guide/Additional_Installation/Kubernetes_Installation/Intel_Gaudi_Kubernetes_Device_Plugin.html)
  - [Driver](https://docs.habana.ai/en/latest/Installation_Guide/Driver_Installation.html)
- AMD
  - [Operator](https://instinct.docs.amd.com/projects/gpu-operator/en/latest/)
  - [Device Plugin](https://github.com/ROCm/k8s-device-plugin)
  - [Driver](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/install-on-linux/en/latest/install/install-overview.html)

## Step by step guide

Below is an example usage of AI Model Serving for MicroShift.
It uses OpenVino Model Server (OVMS) and resnet50 model.

> OVMS can run on CPU, no hardware accelerator is needed for this example.

Author: Configuring here means installing drivers and device plugins.

### Installing AI Model Serving for MicroShift

`microshift-ai-model-serving` RPM contains manifests that deploy `kserve` and `ServingRuntimes` in `redhat-ods-applications` namespace.

To install AI Model Serving for MicroShift run following command:
```bash

> sudo dnf install microshift-ai-model-serving

Reviewer: Should we mention here to install both RPMs?
 - `microshift-ai-model-serving`
 - `microshift-ai-model-serving-release-info`

```

> 

Author: How would that look like?

BTW. Not sure if we need to apply the same level of hand-holding in upstream docs.
I'm kind of assuming (perhaps wrongly) that upstream docs are more for tinkerers and perhaps dev reference.

After installing the package (and restarting MicroShift),
there should be new Pod running in `redhat-ods-applications` namespace:
```sh
$ oc get pods -n redhat-ods-applications
NAME                                        READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
kserve-controller-manager-7fc9fc688-kttmm   1/1     Running   0          1h
```

> You can also install the release info package. It contains JSON file with image references

Author: It all depends.
User could have some build pipeline that prepares RPM with manifests that is installed in the ostree/bootc image. So the release info package is installed in CI when they prepare the manifest and they don't need it in the bootc image.
They could also do what we do - assemble the ServingRuntime during container image build ("deploying serving runtime to workloads namespace" > "automatically..." section).

useful for offline procedures or deploying copy of a ServingRuntime to your namespace during
bootc image build:
```bash
sudo dnf install microshift-ai-model-serving-release-info
```

### Package model into an OCI image (ModelCar)

You can package your model into an OCI image and make use of what is known as [ModelCar](https://kserve.github.io/website/latest/modelserving/storage/oci/) approach.

> This can help you set up offline environments because the model can be embedded just like any other container image.

Author: I guess it depends, if user already has their model in S3 then it might be easier to continue using that.

used in the OVMS' examples.

See "How to build a ModelCar container" section of
[Build and deploy a ModelCar container in OpenShift AI](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2025/01/30/build-and-deploy-modelcar-container-openshift-ai)
article for guidance on building OCI image with a model from huggingface suitable for vLLM model server.

```Dockerfile
FROM quay.io/microshift/busybox:1.37
RUN mkdir -p /models/1 && chmod -R 755 /models/1
RUN wget -q -P /models/1 \
  https://storage.openvinotoolkit.org/repositories/open_model_zoo/2022.1/models_bin/2/resnet50-binary-0001/FP32-INT1/resnet50-binary-0001.bin \
  https://storage.openvinotoolkit.org/repositories/open_model_zoo/2022.1/models_bin/2/resnet50-binary-0001/FP32-INT1/resnet50-binary-0001.xml
```

You can build it and push it to your registry:
```sh
podman build -t IMAGE_REF .
podman push IMAGE_REF
```

For purposes of this documentation, we'll build it locally and use without pushing to registry first.
`sudo` is required to make it part of the root's container storage and usable by MicroShift
as CRI-O and Podman share the storage.

> For offline use cases make sure to include a tag other than `latest`.

Author: ```
sudo podman build -t ovms-resnet50:test .
                                   ----
```

> For offline use cases make sure to include a tag other than `latest`.

Author: If it's unspecified like `-t ovms-resnet50` then it defaults to `latest`

```sh
sudo podman build -t ovms-resnet50:test .
```

Example output:
```
STEP 1/3: FROM quay.io/microshift/busybox:1.37
Trying to pull quay.io/microshift/busybox:1.37...
Getting image source signatures
Copying blob a46fbb00284b done   |
Copying config 27a71e19c9 done   |
Writing manifest to image destination
STEP 2/3: RUN mkdir -p /models/1 && chmod -R 755 /models/1
--> eacb7039436a
STEP 3/3: RUN wget -q -P /models/1   https://storage.openvinotoolkit.org/repositories/open_model_zoo/2022.1/models_bin/2/resnet50-binary-0001/FP32-INT1/resnet50-binary-0001.bin   https://storage.openvinotoolkit.org/repositories/open_model_zoo/2022.1/models_bin/2/resnet50-binary-0001/FP32-INT1/resnet50-binary-0001.xml
wget: note: TLS certificate validation not implemented
COMMIT ovms-resnet50
--> ac4606eb6cb3
Successfully tagged localhost/ovms-resnet50:test
ac4606eb6cb3e6be2fbee9d6bc271df212eb22e6a45a2c33394d9c73dc3bb4cf
```

Run following command to make sure the image exists
```sh
sudo podman images | grep ovms-resnet50
```

Example output:
```
localhost/ovms-resnet50                                     test          ac4606eb6cb3  3 minutes ago  27.5 MB
```

> ### Create namespace

Author: It's the first place where we actually interact with the cluster. Previous steps don't need it.

Use following command to create new namespace that will be used throughout this guide.

```sh
oc create ns ai-demo
```

### Deploying ServingRuntime to workload's namespace

First, you must select ServingRuntime that supports the format of your model.
Then, you need to create ServingRuntime in your workload's namespace:
it can be done in two ways: manual and suitable for automation.

For more information about ServingRuntimes refer to
[RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#model-serving-runtimes_serving-large-models)

#### Manually - from running cluster

You can use following command to save ServingRuntime definition to a yaml file:
```sh
oc get -n redhat-ods-applications servingruntimes kserve-ovms -o yaml > ovms.yaml
```

> Then, you need to remove following metadata:

Author: If you forget to remove `namespace` then command `oc create -n NAMESPACE -f ./file` will fail:
```
error: the namespace from the provided object "redhat-ods-applications" does not match the namespace "ai-demo". You must pass '--namespace=redhat-ods-applications' to perform this operation.
```

If you remove `namespace` and leave others... well, it creates the object. So I guess only removing namespace is necessary.

- `creationTimestamp`
- `generation`
- `resourceVersion`
- `uid`
- `namespace`

Then you can re-create the ServingRuntime in a custom namespace:
```sh
oc create -n ai-demo -f ./ovms.yaml
```

#### Automatically based on installed manifests and release info

Overview of the procedure:
1. Install `microshift-ai-model-serving-release-info` RPM
1. Extract image reference of particular ServingRuntime from the release info file
1. Make a copy of chosen ServingRuntime yaml file
1. Substitute placeholder used for `image:` field with actual image reference

> 1. Create the object using file or make it part of manifest (kustomization)

Author: There's more info below.

I'm wondering if we should have this mini TOC? I think they generate questions before reader moves on to remainder of the section.

Example below shows the process to OpenVino Model Server (OVMS) ServingRuntime:
```sh
# Get image reference for the 'ovms-image'
OVMS_IMAGE="$(jq -r '.images | with_entries(select(.key == "ovms-image")) | .[]' /usr/share/microshift/release/release-ai-model-serving-"$(uname -i)".json)"

# Duplicate the original ServingRuntime yaml
cp /usr/lib/microshift/manifests.d/001-microshift-ai-model-serving/runtimes/ovms-kserve.yaml ./ovms-kserve.yaml

# Update the image reference
sed -i "s,image: ovms-image,image: ${OVMS_IMAGE}," ./ovms-kserve.yaml
```

Then you can re-create the ServingRuntime in a custom namespace:
```sh
oc create -n ai-demo -f ./ovms-kserve.yaml
```

Alternatively, if the procedure above is part of bootc Containerfile and
the ServingRuntime ends up as part of new manifest, the namespace can set in `kustomization.yaml`:
```yaml
namespace: ai-demo
```

### Create InferenceService

Next, we need to create InferenceService custom resource.
InferenceService instructs kserve on how to create a Deployment for serving the model.

> Kserve uses ServingRuntime based on `modelFormat` specified in InferenceService.

Author: First, you need a model and it has some kind of format.
You need right ServingRuntime for the format.
You also need to specify the modelFormat in the InferenceService so kserve knows which ServingRuntime to pick.

> It's possible to add extra arguments that will be passed to the model server using `.spec.predictor.model.args`.

Author: Not sure really

Below is example of InferenceService with model in `openvino_ir` format.
It features additional argument `--layout=NHWC:NCHW` to make OVMS accept the

> request data in different format than usual for demonstration purposes.

Author: I believe it depends on the actual model. 

See: https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/model_server/blob/e5bdea160cefd6c7fc122503eefaff1149816192/docs/shape_batch_size_and_layout.md#changing-model-inputoutput-layout

Extra args are passed through to the OVMS container.

For more information about InferenceService CR refer to
[RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#inferenceservice).

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Example `InferenceService` object with an `openvino_ir` model format
```

Author: I don't think that's a valid markdown?

```yaml
apiVersion: serving.kserve.io/v1beta1
kind: InferenceService
metadata:
  name: ovms-resnet50
spec:
  predictor:
    model:
      protocolVersion: v2
      modelFormat:
        name: openvino_ir
      storageUri: "oci://localhost/ovms-resnet50:test"
      args:
      - --layout=NHWC:NCHW
```

Save the example above of the InferenceService to a file, and create it on the cluster:
```sh
oc create -n ai-demo -f ./FILE.yaml
```

Output:
```
inferenceservice.serving.kserve.io/ovms-resnet50 created
```

Soon, a Deployment and a Pod should appear in that namespace.

> Depending on the size of ServingRuntime's image and size of the ModelCar OCI image,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on the size of ServingRuntime's image and the size of the ModelCar OCI image,
```

> it may take a while for the Pod to become ready.

Author: I think couple minutes is good estimate. In the CI, Pod with ~6GiB Model OCI takes ~3 minutes to start.

It's possible to use
```
oc rollout status -n ai-demo deployment ovms-resnet50-predictor
```
to wait for Deployment to be ready

> 

Reviewer 3: You can check the status of the pod with the following commands:

```sh
$ oc get -n ai-demo deployment
NAME                      READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
ovms-resnet50-predictor   1/1     1            1           72s
```

```sh
$ oc get -n ai-demo pod
NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS      AGE
ovms-resnet50-predictor-6fdb566b7f-bc9k5   2/2     Running   1 (72s ago)   74s
```

Kserve will also create a Service.

```sh
$ oc get svc -n ai-demo
NAME                      TYPE        CLUSTER-IP   EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
ovms-resnet50-predictor   ClusterIP   None         <none>        80/TCP    119s
```

#### Specifying hardware accelerators

> InferenceService can also include plethora of different options.

Reviewer 3: nice use of "plethora"

For example it can contain `resources` section that is passed to the Deployment and then to the Pod,

> so the model server gets access to the NVIDIA hardware (thanks to the device plugin):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
so that the model server gets access to the hardware (thanks to the device plugin). In this example, an NVIDIA device:
```

```yaml
spec:
  predictor:
    model:
      resources:
        limits:
          nvidia.com/gpu: 1
        requests:
          nvidia.com/gpu: 1
```

For complete InferenceService specification refer to [kserve API Reference](https://kserve.github.io/website/latest/reference/api/).

> ### Create Route

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Creating a Route
```

> > Note: You don't need to wait for model server Pod's readiness before creating Route.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Note: You don't need to wait for the model server Pod's readiness before creating a Route.
```

> Finally, we can create an OpenShift Route CR to expose the service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create an OpenShift Route CR to expose the service.
```

> You can either use `oc expose svc` command or create definition in a YAML file and apply it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can either use the `oc expose svc` command or create a definition in a YAML file and apply it.
```

```sh
$ oc expose svc -n ai-demo ovms-resnet50-predictor
route.route.openshift.io/ovms-resnet50-predictor exposed

$ oc get route -n ai-demo
NAME                      HOST                                               ADMITTED   SERVICE                   TLS
ovms-resnet50-predictor   ovms-resnet50-predictor-ai-demo.apps.example.com   True       ovms-resnet50-predictor
```

> ### Querying the model server

Author: Yeah, you might be right.
This is much simpler but also raw. It might be better to reuse real openvino procedure

> ### Querying the model server

Reviewer: From my point of view, as a tech person, I prefer to see the `curl` commands. To understand better how it's working under the hood.
Because this is just an example guide, I'd say we should only add the `curl` command to the metrics and infer endpoint (happy path). And remove the rest of curl commands (to ready, live, etc) in favor of the python scripts from ovms official repo.
Either way, I don't have a strong opinion. It's up to you.

> ### Querying the model server

Author: I'd rather not defer to OVMS example for the metadata, ready, or metrics, because the endpoints are actually "coming" from kserve.

See [v1](https://kserve.github.io/website/latest/modelserving/data_plane/v1_protocol/) and [v2](https://kserve.github.io/website/latest/modelserving/data_plane/v2_protocol/#open-inference-protocol-v2-inference-protocol) protocols.

> ### Querying the model server

Author: Added a new subsection "Other Inference Protocol endpoints"

> ### Querying the model server

Reviewer: Great, thanks.

> Finally, we'll check if our model is ready for inference and we'll reuse OVMS examples to test the inference.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You are ready to check if your model is ready for inference. We'll reuse the OVMS examples to test the inference.
```

> Get the IP of the MicroShift cluster and assign it to the `IP` variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Get the IP of the MicroShift cluster and assign it to the `IP` variable of the Route you just created.
```
I think?

Author: I don't think so

> Use the HOST value of the Route created in previous step and assign to the `DOMAIN` variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the `HOST` value of the Route and assign to the `DOMAIN` variable.
```

> Next, run the following `curl` command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, run the following `curl` command:
```
I know I didn't note all of these, but you can use a colon after every instruction.

> Alternatively, instead of using `--connect-to "${DOMAIN}::${IP}:"`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, instead of using the `--connect-to "${DOMAIN}::${IP}:"` flag,
```

you can use real DNS, or add the IP and the domain to the `/etc/hosts` file.

> ```sh

Reviewer 3: so right here I think you're going to give me the real DNS way; but it's the curl command; perhaps just give the curl and then show the DNS as an optional step

Author: If you have DNS configured so that `ovms-resnet50-predictor-ai-demo.apps.example.com` points to the MicroShift cluster, the this is enough:
```
curl -i "ovms-resnet50-predictor-ai-demo.apps.example.com/v2/models/ovms-resnet50/ready"
```

DOMAIN=ovms-resnet50-predictor-ai-demo.apps.example.com
IP=192.168.0.10
curl -i "${DOMAIN}/v2/models/ovms-resnet50/ready" \
    --connect-to "${DOMAIN}::${IP}:"
```

Response code 200 is expected. Example output:
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
content-type: application/json
date: Wed, 12 Mar 2025 16:01:32 GMT
content-length: 0
set-cookie: 56bb4b6df4f80f0b59f56aa0a5a91c1a=4af1408b4a1c40925456f73033d4a7d1; path=/; HttpOnly
```

> We can also query model's metadata:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can also query the model's metadata:
```

```sh
curl "${DOMAIN}/v2/models/ovms-resnet50" \
    --connect-to "${DOMAIN}::${IP}:"
```

> Output:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Example output:
```

```json
{"name":"ovms-resnet50","versions":["1"],"platform":"OpenVINO","inputs":[{"name":"0","datatype":"FP32","shape":[1,224,224,3]}],"outputs":[{"name":"1463","datatype":"FP32","shape":[1,1000]}]
```

Let's try querying actual model - following example verifies if inference is in accordance to the training data.

First, download an image of a bee from the OpenVino examples:
```sh
curl -O https://raw.githubusercontent.com/openvinotoolkit/model_server/main/demos/common/static/images/bee.jpeg
```

> Next, we need to create the request data.

Reviewer 3: numbering....

1. Start with an inference header in JSON format.

> 1. Get the size of the header. It needs to be passed to the OVMS later in form of HTTP header.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Get the size of the header. It needs to be passed to the OVMS later in form of an HTTP header.
```

> 1. Append size of the image to the request file. OVMS expects 4 bytes (little endian).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Append the size of the image to the request file. OVMS expects 4 bytes (little endian).
```

>    Command below uses `xxd` utility which is part of `vim-common` package.

Author: Depends in `vim` is installed. I cannot guarantee it - in bootc images it had to be installed explicitly.

> 1. Append the image to the request file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Append the image to the request file:
```

```sh
IMAGE=./bee.jpeg
REQ=./request.json

# Add an inference header
echo -n '{"inputs" : [{"name": "0", "shape": [1], "datatype": "BYTES"}]}' > "${REQ}"

# Get the size of the inference header
HEADER_LEN="$(stat -c %s "${REQ}")"

# Add size of the data (image) in binary format (4 bytes, little endian)
printf "%08X" $(stat --format=%s "${IMAGE}") | sed 's/\(..\)/\1\n/g' | tac | tr -d '\n' | xxd -r -p >> "${REQ}"

# Add the data, i.e. the image
cat "${IMAGE}" >> "${REQ}"
```

> Now we can make an inference request against the model server using `ovms-resnet50` model.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we can make an inference request against the model server that is using the `ovms-resnet50` model.
```
it's the server using the model; not us using the model to make the inference request, right?

Author: Yes, we create an input data and send it to the model server, model server takes a request and uses model to process the requests.

```sh
curl \
    --data-binary "@./request.json" \
    --header "Inference-Header-Content-Length: ${HEADER_LEN}" \
    "${DOMAIN}/v2/models/ovms-resnet50/infer" \
    --connect-to "${DOMAIN}::${IP}:" > response.json
```

> Response saved to a `response.json` is a JSON object which a structure as shown below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A response saved to a `response.json` is a JSON object which has the following structure:
```

> Contents of `.outputs[0].data` were omitted from the example for brevity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The contents of `.outputs[0].data` were omitted from the example for brevity.
```

```json
{
    "model_name": "ovms-resnet50",
    "model_version": "1",
    "outputs": [{
            "name": "1463",
            "shape": [1, 1000],
            "datatype": "FP32",
            "data": [ ....... ]
        }]
}
```

> To verify the response, we'll use python.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To verify the response, we'll use Python.
```

> We need to obtain index of the highest element in the `.outputs[0].data`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We need to obtain the index of the highest element in the `.outputs[0].data`.
```

```python
import json

with open('response.json') as f:
    response = json.load(f)

data = response["outputs"][0]["data"]
argmax = data.index(max(data))
print(argmax)
```

> The output of the script above should be `309`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The output of the Python script we just ran should be `309`.
```

We can validate it against [resnet's input data](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/model_server/blob/main/client/common/resnet_input_images.txt):
```
../../../../demos/common/static/images/bee.jpeg 309
```

You can try querying the model using other images mentioned in the resnet's input data.

#### Getting the model server's metrics

To obtain metrics of the model server simply make a request on `/metrics` endpoint:
```sh
curl "${DOMAIN}/metrics" \
    --connect-to "${DOMAIN}::${IP}:"
```

Partial example output:
```

> # HELP ovms_requests_success Number of successful requests to a model or a DAG.

Author: There's a document about that: https://github.com/prometheus/docs/blob/main/content/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats.md
I guess they call it text-based format?

> # HELP ovms_requests_success Number of successful requests to a model or a DAG.

Author: Changed above
```
To obtain metrics of the model server simply make a request on `/metrics` endpoint:
```
to
```
To obtain Prometheus metrics of the model server simply make a request on `/metrics` endpoint:
```

AFAIK OTEL can work with prometheus metrics

> # HELP ovms_requests_success Number of successful requests to a model or a DAG.

Reviewer: Yes, OTEL collector can expose metrics in a Prometheus format. Manually tried this yesterday.

# TYPE ovms_requests_success counter
ovms_requests_success{api="KServe",interface="REST",method="ModelReady",name="ovms-resnet50"} 4
ovms_requests_success{api="KServe",interface="REST",method="ModelMetadata",name="ovms-resnet50",version="1"} 1
```

## Appendix
### Overriding kserve configuration

> If you wish to override kserve settings, you need to make a copy of existing ConfigMap, tweak desired settings, and overwrite existing ConfigMap.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you wish to override kserve settings, you need to make a copy of existing ConfigMap, tweak the desired settings, and overwrite the existing ConfigMap.
```

> Settings are stored in a ConfigMap named `inferenceservice-config` in namespace `redhat-ods-applications`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Settings are stored in a ConfigMap named `inferenceservice-config` in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace .
```

> Alternatively, you can copy it from `/usr/lib/microshift/manifests.d/001-microshift-ai-model-serving/kserve/inferenceservice-config-microshift-patch.yaml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can copy the ConfigMap from `/usr/lib/microshift/manifests.d/001-microshift-ai-model-serving/kserve/inferenceservice-config-microshift-patch.yaml`.
```

> After tweaking it, you must apply it and restart kserve (e.g. deleting Pod or scaling the Deployment down to 0 and back to 1).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After tweaking it, you must apply the ConfigMap and restart kserve (e.g. by deleting Pod or scaling the Deployment down to 0 and back to 1).
```

> For OSTree/bootc systems, create a new manifest making sure it's applied after `/usr/lib/microshift/manifests.d/001-microshift-ai-model-serving`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For RHEL for Edge and bootc systems, create a new manifest making sure it's applied after `/usr/lib/microshift/manifests.d/001-microshift-ai-model-serving`.
```

AI Model Serving on MicroShift is a single-model serving platform for AI models.
It includes limited subset of Red Hat OpenShift AI (RHOAI):
[KServe in Raw Deployment Mode](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#raw_deployment_mode)
and the `ServingRuntimes` object type that is namespace-specific.
Now you can train your models in the cloud and serve them on the edge.

## Definitions

- [ServingRuntime](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#servingruntime)
  - For more information about Serving Runtimes refer to [upstream Kserve documentation](https://kserve.github.io/website/latest/modelserving/servingruntimes/)
- [InferenceService](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#inferenceservice)

## Supported model-serving runtimes

Currently MicroShift supports following model-serving runtimes:
- OpenVINO Model Server
- vLLM ServingRuntime for KServe

> Following runtimes are included but not supported at the time:

Reviewer 2: What does it mean? We cannot separate those out from the image? 
The question that requires explaining is: why do we include those if we do not support them?

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we need to emphasize what we're testing or not in the docs - it may change quickly.
If models are there, let's just mention them? If we specifically support (not test) selected models, that's important distinction.

Author: These are tested and supported by RHOAI, so just like we don't retest every possible feature of other optional components, I think we can say these are supported even without tests (especially for "upstream" doc)

- Caikit Text Generation Inference Server (Caikit-TGIS) ServingRuntime for KServe
- Caikit Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe
- Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS) Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe
- vLLM ServingRuntime with Gaudi accelerators support for KServe
- vLLM ROCm ServingRuntime for KServe

Refer to
[RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#supported-model-serving-runtimes_serving-large-models).
for details about the model-serving runtimes.

## General usage overview

> 1. Develop, train, test, and prepare model for serving

Reviewer 2: Should these be links to the appropriate chapters in the doc, or there's no one-to-one mapping?
Also, why do we need Optional sections?

Author: For example, that first point doesn't have a section. It's more of a prerequisite.
Also, the list is an high level step by step to give idea about the order of actions, not really a ToC

Reviewer 2: Yes, optional may be confusing, especially in the overview. We should attempt simplifying as much as we can.

## Step-by-step guide

Below is an example usage of AI Model Serving for MicroShift.
It uses the OpenVino Model Server (OVMS) and ResNet-50 model.
Note: OVMS can run on the CPU, so configuring an additional hardware accelerator is not included in this example.

### Installing AI Model Serving for MicroShift

The `microshift-ai-model-serving` RPM contains manifests that deploy `kserve`
with Raw Deployment mode enabled and `ServingRuntimes` objects in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace.

To install AI Model Serving for MicroShift run following command:
```bash
sudo dnf install microshift-ai-model-serving
```

After installing the package (and restarting MicroShift),
there should be new Pod running in the `redhat-ods-applications` namespace:
```sh
$ oc get pods -n redhat-ods-applications
NAME                                        READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
kserve-controller-manager-7fc9fc688-kttmm   1/1     Running   0          1h
```

You can also install the release info package. It contains JSON file with image references
useful for offline procedures or deploying copy of a ServingRuntime to your namespace during
a bootc image build:
```bash

> sudo dnf install microshift-ai-model-serving-release-info

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sudo dnf install -y microshift-ai-model-serving-release-info
```

```

### Packaging the AI model into an OCI image (ModelCar)

You can package your model into an OCI image and make use of what is known as the [ModelCar](https://kserve.github.io/website/latest/modelserving/storage/oci/) approach.
This can help you set up offline environments because the model can be embedded just like any other container image.

The exact directory structure depends on the model server.
Below is an example Containerfile with a ResNet-50 model compatible with OpenVino Model Server (OVMS)
used in the OVMS' examples.

See "How to build a ModelCar container" section of
[Build and deploy a ModelCar container in OpenShift AI](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2025/01/30/build-and-deploy-modelcar-container-openshift-ai)
article for guidance on building OCI image with a model from Hugging Face suitable for an vLLM model server.

```Dockerfile

> FROM quay.io/microshift/busybox:1.37

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I'm not sure we can use microshift quay.io repo anywhere, but CI tests.

If the cluster is already running, you can export the desired `ServingRuntime` to a file and tweak it.
If they cluster is not running or you want to prepare a manifest, you can use
original definition on the disk.

For more information about ServingRuntimes refer to the
[RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#model-serving-runtimes_serving-large-models)

#### Exporting ServingRuntime from a live cluster

Use following command to list available ServingRuntimes:
```sh
oc get -n redhat-ods-applications servingruntimes
```

Run following command to save ServingRuntime definition to a YAML file:
```sh
oc get -n redhat-ods-applications servingruntimes kserve-ovms -o yaml > ovms.yaml
```

Edit the saved file and remove `.metadata.namespace` to allow creating the object in different namespace.
Optionally, remove also other metadata:
- `creationTimestamp`
- `generation`
- `resourceVersion`
- `uid`

Re-create the ServingRuntime in a custom namespace:
```sh
oc create -n ai-demo -f ./ovms.yaml
```

> #### Create ServingRuntime based on installed manifests and release info

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure we want this in our docs. Can we stay with the live-cluster-only part?

request input data in a different layout than the model was originally exported with.
Extra args are passed through to the OVMS container.

For more information about the InferenceService CR refer to
[RHOAI documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/2.17/html/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#inferenceservice).

Example `InferenceService` object with an `openvino_ir` model format
```yaml
apiVersion: serving.kserve.io/v1beta1
kind: InferenceService
metadata:
  name: ovms-resnet50
spec:
  predictor:
    model:
      protocolVersion: v2
      modelFormat:
        name: openvino_ir
      storageUri: "oci://localhost/ovms-resnet50:test"
      args:
      - --layout=NHWC:NCHW
```

Save the the InferenceService example to a file, then create it on the cluster:
```sh
oc create -n ai-demo -f ./FILE.yaml
```

Output:
```
inferenceservice.serving.kserve.io/ovms-resnet50 created
```

Soon, a Deployment and a Pod should appear in that namespace.
Depending on the size of ServingRuntime's image and the size of the ModelCar OCI image,
it may take a while for the Pod to become ready.

> You can check the status of the Deployment with following command:

Reviewer 2: I think we're too nice here :). These are pure kube commands, so let's try to shorten it so that we only include info relevant to the current topic.
